Now, this word picture of someone being stumbled is quite vivid, isn't it?
We've all seen someone stumbled.
In fact, we've all stumbled ourselves at times, and there are varying degrees of consequences.
For example, a person can stumble, quickly recover, and continue almost uneventfully down
the path.
There are a person can stumble, fall, break a bone, eventually they recover, but only
after extensive therapy.
Then again, a person can stumble, fall, hit his head, never recover, becoming a casualty.
Well the situation is similar when one is stumbled spiritually.
We can recover quickly, maybe recover over time, or he may never recover, becoming a
spiritual casualty.
So we can not know the ultimate outcome for someone who is stumbled.
So no wonder we're cautioned to be very careful to never be any cause for stumbling.
Turn up to Matthew chapter 18, and here's an especially powerful scripture in this regard.
Matthew 18 verse 6, Jesus says, but whoever stumbles one of these little ones who have faith
in me, it would be better for him to have hung around his neck a millstone that is turned
by a donkey and a bee sunk in the open sea.
Well with graphic language, Jesus describes how that if we cause someone to become a spiritual
casualty, we could actually bring eternal doom upon ourselves.
But now here's a question, what could we do to cause someone to stumble?
Well interestingly there are several similarities between causing someone to stumble physically
and causing someone to stumble spiritually.
Let us discuss three.
Now one, pushing someone could cause them to stumble, especially if they're on uneven
terrain if you think about it.
And this is true physically, spiritually.
But think about Jehovah for a moment, he could push any of us, couldn't he?
He could force us to serve him.
He certainly has the power, but he never uses it that way.
Instead he invites, he encourages.
And he explains the blessings, the curses, depending upon how we decide.
But it's up to us, isn't it?
For example, Isaiah 48, 18, Jehovah says, if only you would pay attention to my commandments,
then your peace would become like a river and your righteousness like the waves of the
sea.
He's teaching, but not forcing.
Now think about it, if Jehovah doesn't force, he doesn't want us to force either, does
he?
For example, parents need to be very careful, they don't just simply push their children
to serve Jehovah.
But rather lovingly, besiegingly like Jehovah, try to reach the heart, and of course clearly
show them the blessings that will come their way if they do.
Another example, elders, should never try to push Jehovah's
sheet.
I heard an experience about an elder during his part, asked the brothers for a show of
hands how many were going out in service the next morning.
Well, only a few raised their hand.
He proceeded to scold the congregation that more should be going out.
Well, he then unwisely asked for another show of hands.
You guessed it, fewer raised their hand the second time.
Now take another example.
Those who conduct Bible studies, should not just try to push their students to do the right
thing.
You've got to quit smoking, you've got to get rid of those idols.
No, not with external pressure, but by motivating their hearts.
You motivate your students.
Or take another example.
None of us should try to push schoolmates, workmates, relatives to accept the truth.
A pushing approach, shoving approach, even though motivated with sincerity has actually
resulted in people being stumbled away from the truth for many years.
Makes me think of the story, are they saying that when a person first learns the truth,
you should lock them up for about six months to contain or minimize the damage they do.
Well, that's saying it's totally erroneous.
You shouldn't lock that brother up.
You should follow that brother.
See, that brother has zeal, doesn't?
But it's true.
We probably do need to help him to properly channel that zeal so that he doesn't try to force
his relatives or others to accept the truth that he is so excited about.
But now, what is the second thing we can do to cause someone to stumble, placing an obstacle
in their path?
Again, this is true physically or spiritually.
And if you think about it, whether we put that stumbling block there intentionally or
unintentionally, the results is the same, isn't?
As mentioned in today's Watchtower comments, wholesome speech and upright conduct can help
us to avoid ever being a cause for stumbling.
In contrast, unwholesome speech.
Stumbling conduct can easily stumble ones inside or outside the congregation.
But now, what about in an area where we have a scriptural right to do something?
Now surely exercising that right, if it's stumble someone, we can't be held accountable
for that, can we?
We'll open up to 1 Corinthians chapter 8.
And here very interestingly, this scripture answers that question.
1 Corinthians chapter 8 verse 9.
It says, but keep watching that your right to choose does not somehow become a stumbling
block to those who are weak.
In that interesting, even our right to choose, if it would stumble someone, we wouldn't
exercise that right according to the scripture.
The Apostle Paul in verse 13 of that same chapter, he said he wouldn't even eat meat
ever again if it stumbled his brother.
Well like Paul, are we willing to forego our rights regarding, for example, wearing a beard,
wearing heavy makeup, using alcohol as just a few examples, if exercising that right
might even possibly stumble somewhat?
But now, what's the third way we could cause someone to stumble, failing to warn him
about a potential trip hazard?
We could call this a sin of omission.
And again, it applies physically and spiritually.
As a physical example, let's say we see the floor has just been mocked.
And an unsuspecting person is approaching that wet area.
Now will we warn them?
If we don't warn them, they fall, hurt themselves, would we not share some responsibility?
Well, similarly, with spiritual application, Galatians chapter 6, verse 1, tells us that
if someone takes a fall step before he's aware of it, what are we supposed to try to do?
Try to readjust such a person.
But then it adds in a spirit of myeleness, don't push him.
But try to gently, lovingly warn and readjust that person.
So there we have three areas in which we must be careful we never contribute toward someone
being stumbled.
We don't push others to serve Jehovah.
We strive to never even unintentionally put a stumbling block in their path, for example,
by insisting on exercising our personal rights.
And number three, we never fail to lovingly warn one whom we see approaching a potential
trip hazard.
Rather than being any cause for stumbling, we want to be a force for good, don't we?
Helping others to stand firm and even helping ones get up if they have fallen.